CI: extract    'markdownlint' and 'golangci-lint' make targets from the ci workflows (#15423)
rook/rook: Documentation/Contributing/development-flow.md

automatically run against every pull request. The results of these tests along with code review feedback determine whether
your request will be merged.

> For developers who do not want to rely exclusively on the CI for test results but would like

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For developers who would like
```

as much as possible before pushing
(a behavior that is not required but highly encouraged),

> the unit tests and various linters can easily be run locally

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the unit tests and various linters can easily be run locally.
```

> the unit tests and various linters can be run locally in a developer environment.

Reviewer 2: Please review and revise

Author: done

> (a behavior that is not required but highly encouraged), the rook project provides convenient

Reviewer: just simplifying a bit, since everything in this repo is implicitly in the rook project
```suggestion
(a behavior that is not required but highly encouraged), the unit tests and various linters can be run locally in a developer environment.
```

Author: applied and squashed. Thanks for the suggestion! I thought this wording was awkward.

> ways to run unit tests and various linters locally in a developer environment.

Reviewer: Remove this line since it was merged with the previous line (and maybe change this whole paragraph so the lines are not so different in length)
```suggestion
```

Reviewer: ?

Author: revised to have line lengths more similar and removed redundancy from the last line.

automatically run against every pull request. The results of these tests along with code review feedback determine whether
your request will be merged.

> For developers who do not want to rely exclusively on the CI for test results but would like to test their changes as much as possible locally before pushing

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> (a behavior that is not required but highly encouraged), the rook project provides convenient means for running unit tests and various linters locally in a developer environment.

Reviewer: Let's make the descriptions as concise as possible. Developers like short messages if possible. :)
```suggestion 
Unit tests and various linters can be run locally in a developer environment.
```

* a resource the code relies on doesn't exist, for each dependency

## Linting

The CI will run various linters against your changes to check code, manifests, and docs for syntactic correctness.

The various linters can selectively be run locally as follows.

### Linting go code

Linting of go code can be performed  in multiple ways:

Firstly, one can use the standard `go vet` tool included with the golang installation.

This is automatically performed by `make build` but rook provides separate make targets for
developers' convenience:

* `make vet`
* `make go.vet`

These are synonymous and essentially run `go vet` on rook's codebase.

Secondly, the equally standard [golangci-lint tool](https://github.com/golangci/golangci-lint)  can be used:

run this from the rook checkout root:

```console
$ golangci-lint run
```

This requires `golangci-lint`to be installed locally and available in the PATH.

Here are some hints how  how to install:

*****on MacOS:** 

```console
brew install golangci-lint
```

***on Linux:**

````console
$ go install github.com/golangci/golangci-lint/cmd/golangci-lint@v1.64.5
$ export PATH="$(go env GOPATH)/bin:$PATH"
```

> But also see [this document](https://golangci-lint.run/welcome/install/).

Author: @BlaineEXE  I do agree that this added part is not elegant or really good, but I don't really understand yet how you want it changed.

> 

Author: @BlaineEXE 
apologies for annoying you with extra blank lines again and again! I'm trying to improve here.

In this concrete case, I don't see this  many blank lines in this context. But I do see multiple toward the bottom of this block which I collapsed now.

This requires shellcheck to be installed locally.

It is available via `brew` on MacOS and as a system package on most Linux distributions.

### Linting  python scripts

The rook  project relies on `pylint`for linting python scripts.

The command `make pylint` is provided for local developer convenience.

This requires `pylint` to be available locally.

It is available via `brew` on MacOS and as a system package on many Linux distributions.
Alternatively, it can be installed with `pip`.

### Linting documentation sources

The rook project  relies on `markdownlint` and `markdownlint-cli2` to check the documentation sources.

The command `make markdownlint` is provided for local developer convenience.

This requires `markdownlint-cli2` to be available locally.

It is available on MacOS by homebrew via `brew install markdownlint-cli2`.

On Linux distributions that do not provide it as a system package, it can be installed via `npm`.

**Examples:**

**Fedora:** 

```console
$ sudo dnf install -y npm
$ sudo npm install markdownlint-cli2 --global
``

**Debian and derivates (like ubuntu):**

```console
$ apt-get install npm
$ npm install markdownlint-cli2 --global

> ```

Author: good point! updated to refer to the project's  doc.

> 

Author: collapsed

* an input is not specified, for each input
* an input is specified incorrectly, for each input
* a resource the code relies on doesn't exist, for each dependency

## Linting

> The CI will run various linters against your changes to check code, manifests, and docs for syntactic correctness.

Reviewer: I agree with Blaine, let's have fewer paragraphs, no need for each sentence in a separate paragraph

Author: done for this case.

Reviewer: Please look at consolidating others as well.

Author: done i some places that I spotted.

The various linters can selectively be run locally as follows.

### Linting go code

Linting of go code can be performed  in multiple ways:

Firstly, one can use the standard `go vet` tool included with the golang installation.

This is automatically performed by `make build` but rook provides separate make targets for
developers' convenience:

* `make vet`
* `make go.vet`

These are synonymous and essentially run `go vet` on rook's codebase.

Secondly, the equally standard [golangci-lint tool](https://github.com/golangci/golangci-lint)  can be used:

run this from the rook checkout root:

```console
$ golangci-lint run
```

This requires `golangci-lint`to be installed locally and available in the PATH.

Here are some hints how  how to install:

*****on MacOS:** 

```console
brew install golangci-lint
```

***on Linux:**

````console
$ go install github.com/golangci/golangci-lint/cmd/golangci-lint@v1.64.5
$ export PATH="$(go env GOPATH)/bin:$PATH"
```

But also see [this document](https://golangci-lint.run/welcome/install/).

> 

Reviewer: still so many extra blank lines!

Author: gone

* an input is specified incorrectly, for each input
* a resource the code relies on doesn't exist, for each dependency

## Linting

> 

Reviewer: extra line

Author: removed

* an input is specified incorrectly, for each input
* a resource the code relies on doesn't exist, for each dependency

## Linting

The CI will run various linters against your changes to check code, manifests, and docs for syntactic correctness.
The various linters can be run selectively locally as follows.

Run `make lint` to run all linters. This will require the following CLI tools to be installed on the system:

1. [yamllint](https://www.yamllint.com/)
2. [shellcheck](https://www.shellcheck.net/)
3. [pylint](https://www.pylint.org/)
4. [markdownlint-cli2](https://github.com/DavidAnson/markdownlint-cli2)
5. [go vet](https://pkg.go.dev/cmd/vet) - part of the golang installation.
6. [golangci-lint](https://golangci-lint.run/)

> 

Reviewer: remove extra line

Author: removing it lets markdownlint fail: lists need to be surrounded by blank lines.

Many of those tools are available via `brew` for MacOS or as Linux distribution packages.
Otherwise refer to the respective project websites for installation instructions.

> In addition to `make lint`, the rook project also provides corresponding individual make targets for the various linters.

Reviewer: How about if we convert this paragraph to a hint? 
```suggestion
!!! tip
    Run `make help` to see all possible make targets
```

* an input is specified incorrectly, for each input
* a resource the code relies on doesn't exist, for each dependency

## Linting

The CI will run various linters against your changes to check code, manifests, and docs for syntactic correctness.

> The various linters can be run locally as follows.

Reviewer 2: Remove these 2 lines please, to keep things concise

Author: done

> The various linters can be run selectively locally as follows.

Reviewer 2: This is no longer relevant with the individual sections removed.

Run `make lint` to run all linters. This will require the following CLI tools to be installed on the system:

* [yamllint](https://www.yamllint.com/)
* [shellcheck](https://www.shellcheck.net/)
* [pylint](https://www.pylint.org/)
* [markdownlint-cli2](https://github.com/DavidAnson/markdownlint-cli2)

> * [go vet](https://pkg.go.dev/cmd/vet) 

Reviewer 2: I requested to remove `go vet` as it isn't a dep that needs isntalled

Author: removed

> 5. [go vet](https://pkg.go.dev/cmd/vet) - part of the golang installation.

Reviewer 2: This is part of `go` install, and that is a pretty obvious requirement. I think we can remove this to avoid any confusion it might cause people who might think vet is a separate thing they need.

Author: done

> 6. [golangci-lint](https://golangci-lint.run/)

Reviewer 2: Nit: order isn't important for these items. I would suggest bullet points instead.

Author: done

> The exception to this requirement of local installation  is golangci-lint.

Reviewer 2: The below statement is unnecessary if you remove golangci-lint from the bulleted list, so please remove the bullet entry

Author: done

Many of those tools are available via `brew` for MacOS or as Linux distribution packages.
Otherwise refer to the respective project websites for installation instructions.

!!! tip
    Run `make help` to see all possible make targets

> Use `make help` to see a list of individual targets (not only linting targets but all).

Reviewer 2: This seems like the same statement twice.

Also, I think this should be showing as a markdown lint error. Admonitions should require an empty line before and after

Author: done.

> Use `make help` to see a list of individual targets (not only linting targets but all).

Author: already gone.

* an input is specified incorrectly, for each input
* a resource the code relies on doesn't exist, for each dependency

## Linting

The CI will run various linters against your changes to check code, manifests, and docs for syntactic correctness.
The various linters can be run locally as follows.

Run `make lint` to run all linters. This will require the following CLI tools to be installed on the system:

> 

Reviewer: extra line

Author: removed

* [yamllint](https://www.yamllint.com/)
* [shellcheck](https://www.shellcheck.net/)
* [pylint](https://www.pylint.org/)
* [markdownlint-cli2](https://github.com/DavidAnson/markdownlint-cli2)
* [go vet](https://pkg.go.dev/cmd/vet) 
* [golangci-lint](https://golangci-lint.run/)

> The exception to this requirement of local installation  is golangci-lint which is run directly with `go`. 

Reviewer: Can we skip this? It seems unnecessary to document

Author: I changed it.

* an input is specified incorrectly, for each input
* a resource the code relies on doesn't exist, for each dependency

## Linting

The CI will run various linters against your changes to check code, manifests, and docs for syntactic correctness.
The various linters can selectively be run locally as follows.

### Linting go code

Linting of go code can be performed  in multiple ways:

Firstly, one can use the standard `go vet` tool included with the golang installation.
This is automatically performed by `make build` but rook provides separate make targets for
developers' convenience:

* `make vet`
* `make go.vet`

These are synonymous and essentially run `go vet` on rook's codebase.

Secondly, the equally standard [golangci-lint tool](https://github.com/golangci/golangci-lint)  can be used:
Run this from the rook checkout base directory:

```console
$ golangci-lint run
```

> This requires `golangci-lint`to be installed locally and available in the PATH.

Reviewer 2: Seems better to me to make a golangci-lint target than to spend time and breath telling users how to manually lint locally.

Author: @BlaineEXE  wrote:

> Seems better to me to make a golangci-lint target than to spend time and breath telling users how to manually lint locally.

I agree, and I wanted to do this anyway. I have done it locally and will push the extra commit soon.

Author: done.

> ### Linting go code
> 
> Linting of go code can be performed  in multiple ways:
> 
> Firstly, one can use the standard `go vet` tool included with the golang installation.
> This is automatically performed by `make build` but rook provides separate make targets for
> developers' convenience:
> 
> * `make vet`
> * `make go.vet`
> 
> These are synonymous and essentially run `go vet` on rook's codebase.
> 
> Secondly, the equally standard [golangci-lint tool](https://github.com/golangci/golangci-lint)  can be used:
> Run this from the rook checkout base directory:
> 
> ```console
> $ golangci-lint run
> ```
> 
> This requires `golangci-lint`to be installed locally and available in the PATH.
> It is available from homebrew on MacOS and may be available on some Linux distributions.
> Otherwise, it can be installed with `go install`. 
> For details see [this document](https://golangci-lint.run/welcome/install/).
> 
> ### Linting yaml manifests
> 
> The rook project relies on `yamllint` to check yaml manifests.
> The command `make yamllint` is provided to conveniently check yaml manifests locally.
> This requires `yamllint` to be available locally.

Reviewer 2: I'd really love to keep this as simple and tight as possible.This will primarily be useful for new developers, and the smaller the barrier to entry, the better. 

New developers will likely be most helped by the top-level lint target that will ensure all linters are run. That would be certain to apply to any changes they might've made to Rook, whether docs, code, or something else. We also don't have to spend time maintaining a long doc that's likely to become stale in a couple years.

```suggestion
Run `make lint` to run all linters. This will require the following CLI tools to be installed on the system:
1. yamllint (add link to yamllint website)
2. shellcheck (link to website)
3. pylint (link to pylint website)
4. markdownlint-cli2 (link to website)

Use `make help` to see a list of individual targets.
```
